# File talk:Cards 32x24 tiles.png

From [NESdev Wiki](Nesdev_Wiki.xhtml) | View [current version](https://www.nesdev.org/wiki/File_talk%3ACards_32x24_tiles.png) | View [other pages](Special_AllPages.xhtml#File_talk_Cards_32x24_tiles_png)

## Tarot deck

The card in the tarot deck you are probably calling the "Joker" is actually called a "Fool" or "Excuse", and it isn't always a trump (it depends on the game; in Type II games it is the XXII of Trumps but in Type I games it is a card you can play at any time even if you are normally required to follow suit, but you will automatically lose the trick). (Also, tarot cards may be Latin-suited, which would be difficult to do with these small tiles; still, the French-suited cards can have correspondence to Latin suits: spades to swords, clubs to rods, diamonds to money, hearts to cups.) Still, in the standard (poker) deck, sometimes two jokers are added, so it would be useful to add it even if not making a tarot deck (in Euchre, it is the highest trump; in Yomi, they are used to break an opponent's combo). --[Zzo38](User_Zzo38.xhtml "User:Zzo38") ([talk](User_talk_Zzo38.xhtml "User talk:Zzo38")) 11:34, 27 July 2013 (MDT) 

    Lack of tiles to fit the joker despite its use in poker decks is exactly what I meant when I referred to the Fool as "joker". (No, I'm not going to try raiding _Batman_ ROMs either.) The Latin suits were easier than making clubs recognizable, especially given what passes for a sword in NES land. Adding one joker takes 3 more tiles (bottom half of portrait shared with jack); adding both takes 6. Feel free to see if you can improve on [my proposed designs](File_Cards_32x24_test_1_png.xhtml "File:Cards 32x24 test 1.png"). --[Tepples](User_Tepples.xhtml "User:Tepples") ([talk](User_talk_Tepples.xhtml "User talk:Tepples")) 15:51, 27 July 2013 (MDT) 

    It is good (and I have no improvements at this time), but maybe someone else who wants to use these will have ideas for improvement (I only mentioned these things because you mentioned on the file description that it didn't have them). However, I do have something to say about the trumps: Many tarot decks have names for the trumps (and pictures to go with them), although the names/pictures can sometimes differ between decks. I suggest that a game made using these cards ought not depend on the names of the trumps (although a few do, but they could be corrected). The trumps are often numbered using roman numerals (and is my preference), although if you add trumps to this set of tiles you may just do whatever works. --[Zzo38](User_Zzo38.xhtml "User:Zzo38") ([talk](User_talk_Zzo38.xhtml "User talk:Zzo38")) 20:03, 27 July 2013 (MDT) 

    Thanks. I shoehorned one joker into the tile set. I made the Roman numerals I-XXI and ended up with 28 tiles: 14 normal and 14 inverted, not counting card pictures. At this point, I'm guessing anything that uses tarot cards will have to dynamically load each visible card's tiles into CHR RAM or use MMC5 ExGrafix. --[Tepples](User_Tepples.xhtml "User:Tepples") ([talk](User_talk_Tepples.xhtml "User talk:Tepples")) 21:04, 27 July 2013 (MDT)
