# List of games by mirroring technique

From [NESdev Wiki](Nesdev_Wiki.xhtml) | View [current version](https://www.nesdev.org/wiki/List_of_games_by_mirroring_technique) | View [other pages](Special_AllPages.xhtml#List_of_games_by_mirroring_technique)

This article categorizes games by their rendering and [scrolling](PPU_scrolling.xhtml "Scrolling") methods, and how that relates to [mirroring](Mirroring.xhtml "Mirroring"). 

Scrolling Type | Mirroring – With Status Bar | Mirroring – With Status Bar and Parallax Scrolling Effect | Mirroring – With Parallax Scrolling Effect | Mirroring – Without Status Bar and Parallax Scrolling Effect | Games example | Comment   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1-screen fixed Only | Any | Vertical, Horizontal2 | Vertical, Horizontal2 | Any | _Donkey Kong_ |   
Horizontal Only | Vertical | Vertical, Horizontal2 | Vertical, Horizontal2 | Vertical | _Castlevania_ , _Cheetahmen II_ , _Gimmick!_ , _Gradius_ , _Super Mario Bros._ |   
Vertical Only | Vertical, Horizontal, Single Screen, 3-screen V/H3 | Vertical, Horizontal2, Single Screen2, 3-screen V/D3 | Horizontal2, Vertical1, Diagonal, 3-screen V/D3, 4-screen4 | Horizontal | _Gun.Smoke_ , _Ice Climber_ , _Recca_ | Horizontal mirroring with a status bar works best with as status bar will have to change address when scrolling vertically. If you are using a parallax scrolling effect on the entire screen with a status bar, such as the _Recca_ , it is best to use a Single Screen, Horizontal, or the Vertical mirroring with a scanline counter IRQ.   
Horizontal Only, field limited horizontally | Vertical | Vertical | Vertical | Vertical | _Bomberman_ , _Lode Runner_ | No data has to be loaded at all when scrolling horizontally, but the area is limited to two screens. This screen type, some of parallax scrolling effect does not work.   
Vertical Only, field limited vertically | Horizontal | Horizontal | Horizontal | Horizontal | _Ninja Kun_ , _Wrecking Crew_ | No data has to be loaded at all when scrolling vertically, but the area is limited to two screens (less the status bar if present).   
Horizontal/Vertical aligned screens | Vertical, Horizontal2, Diagonal, 3-screen V/D3, 4-screen4 | Vertical, Horizontal2, Single Screen2, 3-screen V/D3, 4-screen4 | Vertical, Horizontal2, Diagonal, 3-screen V/D3, 4-screen4 | Alternate H/V, L-shaped, Diagonal, 3-screen D3, 4-screen4 | _Air Fortress_ , _Duck Tales_ , _Jackie Chan_ , _Mega Man_ series, _Metroid_ , _TMNT_ | For use if scrolling direction changes only on a screen-based pattern, as in _Metroid_ and _Mega Man_ 3, 4, 5, 6. Horizontal mirroring with a status bar works best with as status bar will have to change address when scrolling vertically (Also work as Diagonal mirroring) or playfield will have to be written twice to memory. (_Panic Restaurant_ , _TMNT_) If you are using a parallax scrolling effect on the entire screen with a status bar, such as the _Recca_ , it is best to use a Single Screen, Horizontal, or the Vertical mirroring with a scanline counter IRQ.   
1-screen switching by the Horizontal/Vertical | Alternate H/V, Vertical, Diagonal | Alternate H/V, Vertical, Diagonal | Alternate H/V, Diagonal | Alternate H/V, Diagonal | _Guardian Legend_ , _Hydlide 3_ , _Legend of Zelda_ | Depending on the direction of the pattern to scroll in a single screen, it is the best choice for switching the mirroring by the mapper.   
Horizontal/Vertical/Bidirectional aligned screens | Vertical <-> Single Screen2, Horizontal2, Vertical, 4-screen4 | Vertical <-> Single Screen2, Single Screen2, Horizontal2, Vertical, 4-screen4 | Vertical1, Horizontal2, Diagonal, 4-screen4 | Vertical1, Horizontal2, Diagonal, 4-screen4 | _Akumajou Special_ , _Rockman 4 Minus Infinity_ , _TMNT_ II/III | Horizontal or 4-screen mirroring with a status bar works best with as status bar will have to change address when scrolling vertically or playfield will have to be written twice to memory. (_TMNT III: The Manhattan Project_) Vertical mirroring Only with a status bar works best with a scanline counter IRQ. (_TMNT II: The Arcade Game_) If you are using a parallax scrolling effect on the entire screen with a status bar, such as the _Recca_ , it is best to use a Single Screen, Horizontal, or the Vertical mirroring with a scanline counter IRQ.   
Bidirectional, field limited vertically | Horizontal2 | Horizontal2 | Horizontal2 | Horizontal2 | _Super Mario Bros. 3_ , _Tiny Toon Adventures_ | No data has to be loaded at all when scrolling vertically, but the area is limited to two screens (less the status bar if present).   
Bidirectional, field limited horizontally | Vertical | Vertical | Vertical1 | Vertical1 | _Fire Emblem_ | No data has to be loaded at all when scrolling horizontally, but the area is limited to two screens. Vertical mirroring with a status bar works best with a scanline counter IRQ. This screen type, some of parallax scrolling effect does not work.   
Bidirectional, field limited 4-screen | 4-screen4 | 4-screen4 | 4-screen4 | 4-screen4 | _Gauntlet_ | No data has to be loaded at all when scrolling 4-screen, but the area is limited to four screens (less the status bar if present).   
Free bidirectional | Single Screen2, Horizontal2, Vertical, 4-screen4 | Single Screen2, Horizontal2, Vertical, 4-screen4 | Vertical1, Horizontal2, Diagonal, 4-screen4 | Vertical1, Horizontal2, Diagonal, 4-screen4 | _Battletoads_ , _Castlevania II_ , _Hebereke_ , _Kirby's Adventure_ , countless RPG games | If using horizontal or 4-screen mirroring with a status bar there are 2 possibilities: 

  1. The status bar will have to change address when scrolling vertically (_Conquest of Crystal Palace_ , _Double Dragon_ series, _Gradius II_)
  2. The playfield will have to be written twice to memory (_Incredible Crash Dummmies_ , _Kirby's Adventure_ , _Little Nemo: The Dream Master_), which only works if the status's bar size remains constant.

Vertical mirroring with a status bar works best with a scanline counter IRQ. (_Jungle Book_ , _Mickey's Safari in Letterland_)   
Depth screen | Vertical, Horizontal, 4-screen4 | Vertical, Horizontal, 4-screen4 | Vertical, Horizontal, 4-screen4 | Vertical, Horizontal, 4-screen4 | _After Burner_ , _F-1 Race_ , _Mach Rider_ , _Rad Racer_ | Bidirectional Pseudo 3D depth perspective works best with a CHR bank switching ROM nametables. (_After Burner_)   
  
  * 1: Vertical glitches on PAL screens and on NTSC that doesn't overscan.
  * 2: Horizontal glitches will be unavoidable when scrolling (see above).
  * 3: 3-screen mirroring, you can use only specific mapper of MMC5.
  * 4: 4-screen mirroring, and can be used only when you added an additional RAM to the cartridge board.


