# Talk:Family Computer

From [NESdev Wiki](Nesdev_Wiki.xhtml) | View [current version](https://www.nesdev.org/wiki/Talk%3AFamily_Computer) | View [other pages](Special_AllPages.xhtml#Talk_Family_Computer)

This page (and [Rockman](Mega_Man.xhtml "Rockman")) is kind of embarrassing, and was created to fix the redlinks from HVC around the wiki. I'd like to get rid of both.—[Lidnariq](User_Lidnariq.xhtml "User:Lidnariq") ([talk](User_talk_Lidnariq.xhtml "User talk:Lidnariq")) 11:30, 2 April 2013 (MDT) 

    Well, I don't really think the "great games" section belongs here, anyways. If made to fix redlinks, it might be made redirect if it would help. --[Zzo38](User_Zzo38.xhtml "User:Zzo38") ([talk](User_talk_Zzo38.xhtml "User talk:Zzo38")) 12:34, 2 April 2013 (MDT)
    I rewrote it entirely. Now it's a document about the difference between the Famicom and NES. As for [Rockman](Mega_Man.xhtml "Rockman"), I just moved it to [Mega Man](Mega_Man.xhtml "Mega Man"), and we might likewise be able to use that page to document architectural lessons learned from the Mega Man engine (sort of like I did with my dissection of [Bad Apple](Bad_Apple.xhtml "Bad Apple")) or emulation issues related to Mega Man games. --[Tepples](User_Tepples.xhtml "User:Tepples") ([talk](User_talk_Tepples.xhtml "User talk:Tepples")) 13:12, 2 April 2013 (MDT)

## Should this page use the full "Family Computer" name instead of the shortened "Famicom"?

I noticed this while I was editing Famicom-related pages on the wiki. I noticed a discrepancy where while this page uses "Famicom" the disk-based add-on uses the full "Family Computer" name with [Family Computer Disk System](Family_Computer_Disk_System.xhtml "Family Computer Disk System"). So should this page be moved to the full "Family Computer" name as well? --[Bro3256](User_Bro3256.xhtml "User:Bro3256") ([talk](https://www.nesdev.org/w/index.php?title=User_talk:Bro3256&action=edit&redlink=1 "User talk:Bro3256 \(page does not exist\)")) 04:54, 8 April 2025 (UTC) 

    Well spotted. The FDS has "FAMILYCOMPUTER DISK SYSTEM" labelled on the RAM adapter and disk drive. The [Family Computer Network Adapter](Family_Computer_Network_Adapter.xhtml "Family Computer Network Adapter") and [Famicom Network System](Family_Computer_Network_System.xhtml "Famicom Network System") are labelled with "FAMILYCOMPUTER NETWORK ADAPTER/SYSTEM". Curiously, the [Famicom Network Controller](Famicom_Network_Controller.xhtml "Famicom Network Controller") is labelled with "FAMICOM NETWORK". Since the console itself is labelled as "FAMILYCOMPUTER", this article should use "Family Computer" as the primary title. Some redirects would need to be changed/created, of course. --[TakuikaNinja](User_TakuikaNinja.xhtml "User:TakuikaNinja") ([talk](https://www.nesdev.org/w/index.php?title=User_talk:TakuikaNinja&action=edit&redlink=1 "User talk:TakuikaNinja \(page does not exist\)")) 23:13, 8 April 2025 (UTC)
